Okay. Take a listen. How are you, Darrell?
What? Testing 1234. Testing 1234567. Testing.
How's Darrell? Does it sound okay?
That's what he always heard, Darrell. Once he starts coming in as loud.
Oh, wait a minute. I'll get you tried again.
Testing 1234.
Hello, testing.
Hello, testing 4321. 4321 testing. Testing some more 12344321.
I think we can adjust the rest of it. That's tops.
Okay.
Your name is pronounced Saberhagen, correct?
Saberhagen, yes. I have a tennis theory to say Saberhagen.
I guess other people do too.
There are many variations. But Saberhagen is what they taught me when I was a kid.
Yeah, that's good.
Oh, we ready? Are we rolling?
Yeah, we're rolling.
Oh, should we go?
Yeah. Did you tell them what basic format this is going to be?
What do you mean?
How are we going to do the interview?
Oh, I thought we were.
Oh, yeah.
Mr. Saberhagen, could you tell us some things about your origins as a writer?
Do I understand it that you did not start out as a science fiction writer?
Saberhagen.
Saberhagen, let me try again.
Did I say Saberhagen?
Yeah.
Sorry, okay.
Mr. Saberhagen, would you tell us a little about your origins as a writer?
I understand that you did not start out writing science fiction.
Well, no. The first thing I wrote and sold was science fiction.
And actually, I did. My writing career did start with science fiction.
And through this, I got a job at Encyclopedia Britannica.
I was on the editorial staff for five or six years.
They were bringing out their, in the early, in the late 60s and early 70s,
they had this complete revision of the whole set.
And they hired many writers and editors for that.
No, I started writing before I got into, like, I can't say I got into fandom.
Writing science fiction was where it started.
Okay. You said you did not, you didn't come out of the fan structure of science fiction.
You do your work once a week.
No, I had written and sold a story, or a couple of stories, I guess,
before I knew there were such things as fan clubs and conventions and all this.
Did you read much science fiction before you started writing it?
Yeah, I read, when I was very young, when I was like eight or nine years old,
I came upon this old pulp magazine, secondhand magazine someplace,
and there were a couple of stories, and they were really impressed me.
I think they scared the daylights out of me, actually.
And I was, magazines of that kind were prohibited for a while from being right into the house,
because I guess I was sort of turned inside out by some of these things.
But then I just, you know, kind of went away from it for a few years.
When I was about sixteen, I started haunting the secondhand magazine shops,
which they then had in Chicago, and picking up old copies of Astounding,
which as it was then called.
And then I didn't really get into writing until later on.
I was in the Air Force in my twenties, and I would, I had a lot of time on my hands.
I would make a stab at it now and then.
And still, I guess I didn't have access to a typewriter and all this privacy and so on.
And still nothing really came of it.
And I was in, I see I was almost thirty before I actually sat down and seriously wrote a story
and really typed out the manuscript properly and got it.
Okay, when it sent it off to be sold.
And then I started selling, I didn't sell everything I wrote,
but I started selling some things right away.
And from then on it's been my main occupation.
Not always a full-time job, but it's what I've done.
You've never done any mainstream writing at all that was published?
No, I don't, I guess when you say mainstream,
I guess I'm coming to think more and more of mainstream as a kind of an offshoot of writing or literature,
whatever you call it, where you're limited to things that could only happen with a high probability
in the next block or in the next two months or something like that.
And I think if you look back historically, most of literature has really been wide open.
You're allowed to use ghosts, you're allowed to use your other planets.
You can do all these things.
We've somehow turned this around and put this in its own little ghetto,
but I think it really should be the other way.
Would you be able to say anything about why it was science fiction that made you,
would you say science fiction made you become a writer or would you have done so otherwise?
What was it about the feel that detracted you and made you decide to try your hand at it?
I guess just the freedom of ideas of being able to put in, about being limited to the next block or the next two months.
The book I just finished for ACE, it's called Octagon,
and it's probably as close to a mainstream thing as I've ever done.
It's set in the very near future and it's largely about computers and programming
and people who play games with computers.
And I guess when I started to write it, it was still science fiction
and by the time it's published it may be just a little out of date even, I don't know.
A lot of readers, you probably know this, a lot of readers associate you of course with the Berserker series.
I think to some readers you might be typed as Fred Saberhagen, the Berserker author.
Does that bother you? Have you tried to please you or have you tried to overcome that?
I mean I'm talking about readers who don't know you very well.
Obviously the body of your work is very flexible, you've done many things.
I think what's got the biggest reader response by far is the Dracula books I've done.
I get more letters and mail and sometimes more money for one of those and then for all of Berserkers.
Berserkers have been around a long time and a lot of people have picked up on them over the years
but they're not really what sells the most books now.
The response, you talk about reader response to the Dracula material.
I guess there's no way of you knowing this, but would those be science fiction readers responding?
Because sometimes when I see lists of your published work they often leave the Dracula material off of it
because I guess it's not considered hard science fiction.
Yeah, sometimes you see it on the fantasy shelf in the bookstore, sometimes you see it in occult,
sometimes you see it on the new shelf where only the zombies and haunted babies and all these modern recent things appear.
I don't really care as long as people are reading it.
I don't know if they're science fiction readers, some of them think they're vampires.
Maybe some of them are vampires. I get a pretty good letter here and there.
I wish I don't answer as a rule.
Now there have been four of those books right beginning with the Holmes Dracula file.
The Dracula tape is the first one which is a recounting of the original Bram Stoker's original Dracula story.
Only seen from the point of view of the Count.
And there's Holmes Dracula and an old friend of the family and Thorne which is out now.
And I'm talking about Jim Bain, the editor at Tom Doherty Associates now about another.
I'm not sure about that one yet but we're talking about it.
Well as long as we brought up the Dracula material.
How is it that you got interested in one of the more famous, possibly mythological, possibly not mythological creatures?
Well it started, I just sat down one day and just for fun.
I wanted to reread the original Dracula which I had read once before years earlier.
And I think it's not all that good a book really apart from this titanic devilish central character.
But it struck me more and more as I read through it that Dracula was hardly ever on stage.
And this thing, everybody's talking about him and he's almost always off somewhere doing something.
Nobody quite knows what.
So I guess maybe I had Rosencrantz and Guildenstern are dead on my mind or something like that.
But I just thought what would it look like from the chief villains point of view.
So off I went it was awful lot of fun to write and it just seemed to go right along.
And then the time came to think about doing a sequel for it.
And it occurred to me that nobody had ever put Holmes and Dracula in the same book up to that point as far as I knew.
And it seemed to me they, this would be very interesting.
It's as if they represented the two sides of the human psyche or the intellect and the dark side.
And here they were, they were contemporaries, they were in the same city in the same year.
And everybody knew about them both and still they'd never, they just completely missed each other.
So I decided I had to try to make contact there someplace.
I rather enjoyed the sort of the contest and Wills Holmes great intelligence against Dracula's great experience.
And especially if I remember correctly one point where they're in, I believe it's in Holmes study.
He's trying to course Dracula to do something he's protecting himself with a gun.
And of course Dracula goes well it's not going to do anything to me and Holmes shoots him and it's wooden bullets.
That was a marvelous stroke of ingenuity on your part.
Did you research the character of Dracula? You must have researched him fairly extensively.
Yes I did when I could. I looked up the historical, sometimes you find, once you know his other names and titles and so on,
sometimes you find references to him in these, these stayed historical articles in Britannica or somewhere else.
You know known as this prince who was rather hard on his people and everyone else who came in the region.
But you don't connect this, this guy with the one in the legend.
What is the character that Dracula is based on? What is his name?
Well I can't, it's Vlad Tepis or Tepish or something like that. I can't really pronounce it the way it should be.
But he was a prince of Malachia, not in Transylvania but very near to there.
He lived in the 15th century and he finally married the sister of the king of Hungary.
I go into some of this in Thorn and the one that's out now.
He was imprisoned by the king of Hungary supposedly for 12 years and during this period he somehow married the king's sister.
And from then on the name of the king's sister was expunged from all the records.
So I don't think anybody knows now, today even what her name was.
And then Dracula was released and he was restored to power as a prince.
And then he was assassinated in a few months after that I believe.
And if his history goes on in this world from that point, it's not verified by the history books.
But there certainly was a real character.
And then you get all these horror stories, atrocity stories about him.
Many of which were really composed by his political enemies at the time.
So he was certainly pretty nasty but it's doubtful if he was really as bad as all the stories would have it.
He had a rather bad public relationship.
Yeah, I guess.
In Thorn you had sort of a dual storyline following some of the goings on back in the 15th century and then another story happening in the present.
Yes.
Why did you decide to write it that way?
Well, there's a couple of reasons. I like to do it that way because I think everything moves faster if you can switch from one group of characters to another.
Or from the same character at one time to another time.
And a lot of the housekeeping things, people moving around and getting ready for the next scene.
And so a lot of that can go on off stage and you just pick up where something is really about to happen again.
In effect it was like two short books, one set in modern times and one in the 15th century as you point out.
And this makes one sizeable book and one sizeable book sells better than two short books I'm pretty sure.
People seem to like big books, other things being equal.
Empire of the East is certainly the best seller I've had so far.
And it's really three short books rewritten and put into one volume.
Pardon me. You said that reader response for Dracula.
Do that again. You need some time to chop that.
Okay. You said that reader response to the Dracula material was pretty high.
Would you have written four books?
Was it reader response that caused you to write the four? Would you have stopped it earlier?
I don't know. It's hard to say.
Sometimes you're wondering should I write this book next or that book.
Meaning this idea or that idea.
And if the editor calls up and says,
will you do us another book about Dracula, then you naturally are nudged into picking that idea over some other one.
So I think it's kind of a mixed situation.
Let's go on to the Berserk material for just a little bit.
What got you started on that series? Do you remember the impetus or the idea that caused that?
Yeah. That's one of the standard questions that I'll interview.
I was writing, let's see, back very early, in the early 1960s.
I was writing short stories, most of which were being published in Galaxy or Worlds of If, Worlds of Tomorrow.
Fred Polin was the editor then.
And I had this good idea for a short, kind of a puzzle short story.
How is the hero who is out in his one man spaceship going to put together some kind of a device?
He has an intelligent animal to help him.
How is he going to use this, not really intelligent, but moderately for animal.
How is he going to use this moronic assistant of his and a few standard parts and put together some kind of a computing device that will play a game resembling checkers or something like that.
It got fairly involved.
Anyway, I had this, this is the idea.
I had an idea how we should do this. This is how it started.
And I got about halfway through the story and I said, well, what sort of a villain will I have?
And I said, I know what sort of villain I'll have.
I'll have this giant robotic spaceship, 50 miles in diameter, et cetera, et cetera.
And it just, I just looked around and there it was.
And I don't know that story is still being reprinted by the way.
It's probably earns me more money this year than it did for first year.
It was published.
Fred Poe really liked the Berserker.
He bought the story. He wasn't all that crazy about the story, but he liked the Berserker.
And he said, why don't you do some more Berserkers and have somebody go on one of these things and so on.
And it's just there for a while about all I wrote was Berserkers.
Did you use the term Berserker in that story? I thought it was the story was the game, wasn't it, if I recall?
No, that story was called, I called it, well, I had two titles.
I was going to call it To Move and Win and Fred retitled it.
But he didn't like that and he called it Fortress Ship, which always struck me as something,
it's not quite right because the thing was neither a fortress nor a ship.
So it appears under two or three different titles and different collections and so on.
The game came along much later.
The term Berserker, though, did you use that from the very beginning?
That appears in the first, it says men called it a Berserker.
Now I suppose I'd put people called it a Berserker.
Could you say a little bit about the origin of that term?
It just seemed to pop up and naturally attach itself.
Of course the Berserkers historically are the Norse warriors who would go mad and run around killing people until they were killed.
And I don't know why it just seemed to come along with the original concept and I used it.
I was kind of curious about this.
Have you ever worked out any sort of a timeline for your Berserker material?
It almost seems to me like a future history.
Was it men as such or could it be that way if somebody worked out?
I guess it could be.
What I've tried to do is just always leave plenty of room in every direction.
I have this war going on for thousands of years and over at least a good part of the galaxy.
I guess if you asked me about two different stories I could probably tell you which one was supposed to come ahead of the other one.
But I just wanted to avoid being too limited.
Fred Poel thought I was about to wipe out all the Berserkers there at one point.
I did a story called Stone Place.
This huge Berserker fleet was destroyed.
But I took care that some of them got away at least.
Of course many of the stories are related.
I recall some of them you'll end a story and then pick it up sometime later.
Sometimes the same characters come and go.
I recall Johann Carlson and several others.
It's kind of fun to do that.
I don't know if I'm going to write another Berserker story.
They don't know if they were real or not.
What about the origin?
The idea that, of course the idea behind the Berserker is that there's been this tremendous war.
Who knows how far in the past.
The Berserkers are the remnants of one of the races that had built these computer robotic creatures to destroy life.
Do you think that a civilization that advanced would still have violent murderous tendencies?
Or would they tend to be more pacific if they've gotten that far?
Well the only advanced civilization we know of has from time to time violent murderous tendencies.
I don't see why we have to rule it out for others.
But isn't it the human race, the man in the whole series, that I get the impression that if it weren't for the human race against the Berserkers,
that they've retained their ability to make war.
Yes.
The other races of the galaxy might have been wiped out by the Berserkers.
Yeah that's part of the background of the series.
At least the races that we've so far encountered.
I'm always trying to leave the door open for, I can say, well it really wasn't entirely that way.
There was an exception here or there somewhere.
I was just curious because some people, I think it was, Norman Spinrad we talked to not too long ago,
and he said any race that becomes sufficiently advanced, space travel and all that,
you know, far out that they could not be violent because they couldn't have gotten that far,
they would have destroyed themselves before then.
Well I don't know, here we are, we're in the verge of space travel,
and we're certainly violent from time to time at least.
And it's just not in our best interest to destroy ourselves, and I don't think we will.
We could have some nasty wars, but I don't think we're going to wipe ourselves out.
One of the stories, I had a specific question on one of your stories that interested me.
I think it was called in the Temple of Mars.
We used the background there of Chaucer's Night Stale.
What made you do that? I was very curious about that.
I guess I had been reading Chaucer probably, and when something grabs you or moves you
or seems very intriguing, then the tendency is just to put it into a story.
And I think stories profit by having different elements from different fields of ideas
tied together, not just mixed, but somehow tied together.
And one of the novels too, I think Brother Assassin, premised there as time travel.
This particular area, this particular planet I guess.
Okay, yeah, the only, I didn't want, things would just get away from me.
I thought if I had time travelers all over the galaxy and Berserkers at the same time.
So I limited time traveling the Berserker universe to this one world.
One of the questions I had though about the particular encounter with the Berserkers there,
two things that to me were a little unique.
Number one, there was the Berserker android, or pretty close to one.
He could pass with the Monks Cow and so forth.
But also at the end, the one Berserker that he implied that he had almost achieved life,
that he had reached the point where he could appreciate what life was and he wasn't going to destroy it.
That was the idea, yeah.
Could you explain how, in other words, a machine, what he's been around so long,
the evolution of machine intelligence to the point where...
Well, he has, as I recall it, first about the android.
I do have the androids in other stories.
Part of the rules of the game is that if a human being gets a good, close look at one,
he's not fooled by it.
He can't, about the robot achieving life,
I think the idea was that he, through his time traveling there through so many,
I forget how many thousands of years,
he had accumulated some kind of, I forget what I call it, evolutionary energy or something or other.
He had acted on him as nothing else would have and he did become alive.
Or it didn't come alive.
Does that answer the question?
I found that interesting. I hadn't noticed that in any of your other stories or new books.
That is the only one that ever happened.
In other words, it would be only that particular unit of the Berserkers.
Not the whole assembly of them, no.
Another question on that novel, I had the two of the characters.
I think it was Vincento and Brother Jovon.
I noticed that in many of your works, you will use actual historical incidents or frameworks.
Were either of those characters based on actual historical people?
Well, Vincento is Galileo, of course, and Brother Jovon is Francis of Assisi.
I had suspected I wanted to confirm.
Of course, we're really several hundred years apart, but I kind of wondered what would happen.
It's like Holmes and Dracula, I wonder what would happen if I could bring them together and get some kind of a spark from it.
Do you have any more of the Berserker material?
I really want it, but it's not for the tape.
I'll ask you later.
Just some point that I don't understand.
And somebody else who read it probably, everybody plays it with me.
Well, if you want to bring it up now.
It's about, it's on the Berserker man.
That's the latest one, right?
Well, Ultimate Enemy, I think, actually, but that's a collection.
Yeah, this is a collection.
And I forget which one has come out more recently, really.
This one has stories that go further back in the stories.
Yeah.
The suit, Lancelot?
Lancelot, yes, the suit of armor that Michelle wears.
At the end of the, I'll let it back up.
In Berserker Man, at the end of it, where Michelle, Lancelot, the suit of armor that he wears,
they approach the core of the galaxy.
And they, he meets, is that a collection of individuals who are living there in the core?
It's a collection of representative individuals from different, the different intelligent races,
at least some of them around the galaxy.
And there's one spot left open, the siege perilous, one chair is still to be occupied.
And this is for Michelle.
And what happens next, I really don't know.
But presumably the whole galaxy, the life in the galaxy moves up to some higher level that we can't understand at this point.
The one Berserker he was pursuing in there, once it, what exactly happens to it?
I got the, I assume that it realized what was there.
It was trying to reach this one remaining, well it didn't know, first it didn't know it was there.
And then it was trying to fill this one remaining slot there.
And it couldn't do it, it just ground to a halt on the way.
And possibly the realization that the Berserkers could never attain that level?
I guess something like that.
I don't always think all these things up consciously I guess.
Sometimes it's better not to nail it down.
I think maybe it's better for the writer not to nail it.
I think it's really part of the job of the critics and teachers and reviewers and whatever they...
to look into things and find things there that the writer didn't know about, seriously.
In other words, once the writer has finished the work it's no longer part of his responsibility to elucidate or explain that it's up to the readers.
Basically I think yes.
He can talk about it if he feels like, as I'm talking about it now.
But his job is really done and if other people want to take it seriously then it's their job to work on it some.
Interpretation will be left up to the individual reader?
Yeah, or the readers who get together and act as a group if they want to do that.
Okay, on that point, just let me follow that up just for one more point here.
Science fiction, it seems to me that there's one unique thing about the field.
The interaction between author and fan.
Like maybe at the conventions and so forth.
It seems to me that in no other area of writing I can think of is there such an interaction between authors and fans.
Aren't you asked, I mean if you go to conventions maybe fan mail and so forth, aren't you pestered or asked by fans?
What did you mean? What are you going to do here?
In other words, in no other field of writing besides science fiction is that kind of interplay.
Doesn't that make science fiction author kind of special in his...
Yeah, there is.
Often the fans don't say, what are you going to do? They come up and tell you what you did.
Or they, well you should have done or something or other.
Yeah, some are very intelligent and see things that, as I say, the writer himself doesn't see anything.
We have a break.
Sure.
Break it down.
Oh!
You're still here.
Are we here?
I'm here.
Testing one, two, three here.
We're all here.
Very good.
And your book, Empire of the East, the three separate stories were published separately, weren't they?
Yeah, originally there were three books, The Broken Lands, The Black Mountains and Changeling Earth.
And they came out some years earlier with split up among two different publishers as it happened.
The way problems of publishing and everything being out there.
And then not long ago Jim Bain called me up and said, why don't you take these three books and rewrite them, make a bigger ending.
The ending you've got is too small for one giant book.
Rewrite them and we'll publish them in one volume.
And they did.
And he did.
And even the big trade edition, it sold very well.
And this one is doing very well.
And I'm very happy I got a chance to redo it just the way I wanted it.
Now the reason I was asking is the main character in the first book is Rolf.
Yeah.
And but in the second two books, the main character shifts to Chuck.
And I was just wondering if that was because there was a time difference between when you originally wrote them.
Well, no, I think maybe what it is is people, villains are people with a good touch of villainy in them are more fascinating to me at least.
And I seem to do better with vampires or circus villainous warlords and so on.
And I just seem to wind up approaching things from that point of view.
Well, did that sort of grow as you went through the series?
Like at the beginning of the first book, I thought Chuck was going to be the really bad guy.
And I was fascinated to watch him.
I don't suppose you could say he was turned into the hero or the good guy, but he still changed.
Did that grow as you wrote it?
No, that grew.
When I started, I knew I was fairly sure I was going to do a trilogy.
And I started the first book.
I knew pretty well how the first book was going to end, but I had no idea how the trilogy was going to, or who Ardna was going to turn out to be.
If we ever solved the problem.
And as I went along, it just seemed to straighten itself out or take the form that it did.
I have to ask something about Ardna and the change.
Maybe this isn't...
I'm out.
Yeah, okay.
That's okay.
You're asking him a question.
The power that you call Ardna in the book Empire of the East.
This may not be a fair question to ask of an author, but I was puzzled by what Ardna was.
I know what his function was to initiate the change, I suppose, way back.
But was he sort of a super computer?
Yeah.
A machine, in other words.
Well, but then he had become more, when the world changed and the powers of magic and so on became effective, then he could be more than a machine.
Just as a draught could be more than a dog and so on.
So in other words, the change, in addition to, I think what it did was, was to alter the structure of atoms and so forth.
Nuclear energy was impossible and magic came into being and so forth.
So there were widespread changes.
Yeah.
And Ardna's...
It's almost something like Larry Nibbins' magic goes away on the...
Not quite.
But at the end of that book, I got the impression that with the battle between Ardna and Orcus and I guess the annihilation of both, that magic and science or magic and technology now would both work or be blended in a new order of things.
Yeah, that was the idea.
The world was changing again and at least for a time, both of these kinds of powers would be functional.
You said that that's been your biggest seller, Empire of the East?
Yeah.
Well, it's...
Well, it hasn't been out in this form as long as some of the other books have, but it certainly, you know, certainly took off there, yeah.
One thing I notice in the overall body of your work is your...
What to me is an incredible flexibility.
It seems to me like you write hard science fiction, you write science fantasy, you write social or soft science fiction.
You write horror, I think, and specimens was sort of a horror story.
Do these stories just come to you or do you deliberately set out to do different kinds of things?
Oh, I set out to do different kinds of things, yeah.
Deliberately, I mean.
Oh, yeah, depending on what the idea is that you start with.
I wouldn't want to do a hard science fiction story about Dracula.
I think probably it would be impossible.
So if you want to write about Dracula, you have to accept at least part of the rules of the supernatural story.
What about that book when I enjoyed very much specimens?
It seemed to me that that was an attempt to write a horror story with a haunted house and underneath.
But it's also the science fiction at the end when you realize the creatures from outer space.
Yeah, it was an attempt to write a good grade B movie plot and nobody has bought it yet to make a good grade B movie.
But there's a new ace edition coming out in a few months here and maybe somebody will.
But in other words, your intent was to, you know, the horror realm, to do something of that sort.
Yeah, just kind of a fun story, if you can call it that, of menace to be overcome.
The old house in the story, by the way, really exists in Lombard.
When we were dead three years ago, when we lived in Chicago, we were looking for houses in the area there.
And that was one that we looked at.
Another one, another book too, that to me was...
I don't know if the present owners have read the book or not, probably.
Go ahead.
Had I not known you had written it, I wouldn't have guessed you did.
The Love Conquerors All.
To me, that was sort of in the tradition of space merchants, social science fiction, extrapolating and current tendencies.
What was it again, the origin, I guess, the impetus, the interest in that kind of thing?
The impetus, I guess it was the controversy about abortion and sex.
Things were bombarded, questions were faced with all the time here.
And I just tried to, you know, the traditional science fiction writers viewpoint,
take a look at everything, turn everything inside out and see how it looks from the other point of view.
Would I misread that book to call it a dystopia?
It certainly was not a very pleasant society, I guess.
I don't know, it has not been one of my best-selling books, apparently.
I was going to ask about reader response to that, how it had sold.
It's not sold all that well, I don't know.
I expect it's going to be kept in print, maybe with a different cover.
Sometimes those things have an effect.
I thought you had fun writing that.
I enjoyed the way you would turn around, well, I don't know everything, the vocabulary,
the little everyday expressions that people used based on this kind of society.
Did you have fun constructing all of that and writing that?
The word repression is almost an obscenity.
And instead of curse words, you would use chastity or purity.
Was that fun to dream all that up and write?
I don't remember that as fun in the sense that Dracula tape was fun.
It was more, I think I felt more seriously there that I was trying to get at something serious
by approaching it in this backward way.
In a sense, it's always fun to work at something you like to do.
Would you say that of your work, that book might be the closest to having a message or a theme to it?
Well, I hope it doesn't sound like a preachment of any kind, because that's pretty deadly.
I suppose maybe it's...
You get into the question of does art carry messages and is what we're doing art or what are we doing?
Basically, I'm just trying to write what I think are good stories,
and the rest of it take care of itself, I guess.
The reason I ask, I guess I would have called the book satire in a lot of ways,
and it seems to me a satirist almost by definition has a moral purpose, whether it's obvious or not.
Would I be wrong in calling it satire in some ways?
No, I think that's your department, really.
Whether it's satire or what it is, I think as I said, I think I've done my job when I've written it.
So I wouldn't say you're wrong.
Classify it however you will.
Okay, my favorite book of your work, this is just my personal opinion, is The Mask of the Sun.
I enjoyed reading that very much.
It seems to me you had to do... I don't know, maybe you are knowledgeable in the field,
but did you have to do research on the Incas, the past, the culture you're writing about?
I didn't actually go there. My wife has been there.
She spent a little time in Peru before we were married,
and she had some slides and some books and could answer some questions, and that helped a lot.
I've never been there, but I was intrigued by this, what if possibility if the first Spanish expeditions of conquest had failed
as they came so close to failing, several points, and we might have a situation where Peru would have turned out something like Japan
being exposed to western civilization, but not overwhelmed by it, and going on developing their own way for hundreds of years afterward.
Okay, that and Brother Assassin I think would be your major works which deal with time travel, right?
I can't think of any other at the moment.
Yeah, that's the... you use time travel simply as a science fiction device, an area of speculation,
or is it something that you think has possibilities?
Is any time travel work fantasy? I think Larry Niven said that.
If you deal with time travel, you're dealing with fantasy because it's impossible.
Well, I would hesitate to say what's physically ultimately impossible.
I don't think we really begin to know yet what things the universe can produce in the way of just physical effects
and conditions and so on.
It's hard to see logically how a time travel story can be constructed
because go back and murder your grandfather and all that cliches.
But I think it's very useful as a device.
I've just finished editing a book for Ace. It's called Spade Full of Spacetime.
I have stories from 12, 13 different writers in there about probing the past, not by means of a time machine.
I ruled out time machines and simply getting in your... whatever, and going back to an earlier year.
I wanted people to think about scientific investigations of the past.
However they could do it without simply going back.
I think I got some very good stories in there. Not quite as much hard science as I hope to get.
I think it'll be very interesting when it comes out.
When you start writing a story, do you first develop the characters and then form the story around them
or form the story and then develop the characters for it? Or how do you do that?
I think I have the story first. James Jones or somebody I think said that every writer has his stock company of characters.
It's like a group of actors. They sort of change their names and faces a little bit and come on and perform.
Sometimes I suspect they have a... I hope they're versatile. They don't always come out the same.
The idea comes first for the characters, for me.
How far ahead do you plan works in progress? Do you have a list of works that you're going to write?
Do you work by schedule or by mood?
Well, I work by schedule when I have a chance.
When kids are off at school, it's the best time.
In the back of my mind, I have a list of things to be done.
Then I have things I have contracted to do. Of course, it takes on a new form of reality then.
You have to really start at it. But there seems to be no shortage of ideas.
Are we still having more?
We just have a few more minutes. We're going to put on one more tape and catch a little bit more.
Is that okay?